The chairman of the council was running it. And he
was the head of industrial education. Right,
right. In fact, as a young professor at A&M, he had
Earl Rutter in his class. Did you know that? No. Oh.
And so they were really close friends. Mm-hmm. all
of the stuff that went on between them. It was a very
collegial affair between them. And I appreciated
Chris Johnman recommending me to Earl Rudder.
But, Rudman had been there since he hired Barry
Bryant. I'm pretty sure he was the councilman. I
understand that his picture was on the front page
of Life magazine. with the old water tower in the
background and how the Aggies hire a football
coach or something like that. I've never seen that
thing lately. I think I remember seeing it when it
happened, because I was at Baylor in those years.
By the way, after I accepted the contract from,
that reminds me, the contract to come to A&M,
Baylor tried to hire me there for exactly the same
job at half the money.
That was something. Baylor has sensed over the
days that they've improved their situation
really a great deal. But it was pretty poor pay.
Man, I was really in high cotton to come down here.
Twice what I would have gotten there. Let's see.
Campus reaction to Mr. Rudder's death? Never
forget it, the last day of my life, seeing the
procession east of the academic building. Quiet,
completely quiet column of people running to file
taxes. The column had been tested in the system
building there. And for me, going then to the
memorial service in G. Raleigh, Alan Shivers,
LBJ, everybody that mattered, John Connolly, all
the great Texans were there. All right, you stayed
with the counseling for how long? Until 70. And
then what? And then I became associate dean of
education under Frank Hubert. I still taught some
of the courses that I've been always teaching. But
the way that worked out, Dean Hubert had had
someone writing the proposal to create a college
of education. He'd already created the College of
Science and the College of Business and all those
others. And he was about to create the College of
Liberal Arts and the College of Education. The
person who was writing that proposal for him had
said, had left suddenly in the middle of the year.
And he knew that
I'd been here nine years and I was sort of looking
for a place to go somewhere else and so he called me
in and offered me half time off to right finish that
proposal and I've forgotten when he offered to
take me on as associate dean, but in that spring
semester there very soon after I started doing the
work. So this is happening at about the time of Mr.
Rudder's death and an interim president. Yeah,
yeah. I got the impression that things were a
little bit iffy around the campus while we had the
interim president there for a while. party to the
higher administration things. Even though I was
associate dean, I was for students, associate
dean for students. And so I didn't have any much
contact with the upper level, mid-level
administration. As far as you know, did Dean
Hubert, was he very positive about being dean of
education as that big college is broken up? I
always had the impression that that was his aim as
soon as he came. Same, I have that same feeling. I
don't have anything to back it up except for...
Well, I think University of Texas' experience
with Silver over there might have had something to
do with it. They never did break up the College of
Arts and Science over there to this day. And I
thought that was too much for one man to handle. and
maintain equality with the cross. Describe his
style of deaning. He gave you a job to do and turns
you loose and lets you do it. I had a conference with
him every Monday morning and told him what to do.
I came on as associate dean June the 1st. after this
spring. I'm working with a coordinating board and
with him and everybody getting this proposal. And
took it to Austin, came back to Austin again. All
that stuff. I went on board and he took three weeks
vacation. There was another associate dean, but
he made it very clear that I was in charge while he
was gone. So you almost started office. And it was
an interesting time. All right, so you then went to
academic council meetings and dean's meetings,
APC meetings. Yeah. We had an associate dean's
that did more of the work then, but yeah. All right,
who presided over the meeting of the deans during
that period? Well it was only a month. He was gone
three weeks. So I really didn't go to a meeting of
the deans. I was not called to go to a dean's
meeting. I immediately started going to the
associate dean's meeting. Because I'm thinking
Byers was the, Horace Byers was the- I believe
Horace Byers was the person that everybody went to
at that time. By the way, he lived in this house at
the time. Really? Yeah. Didn't know that.
What do you think were Dean Hubert's goals for the
College of Education? Make it the best teacher
preparation college in the state of the nation, if
he could. And what do you think he thought were the
key steps to do to achieve that goal? Well, he had a
lot of feeling about the early teaching
experience. As far as I can tell, it was not a good
situation. In fact, I don't think they had a
teaching experience in the freshman and
sophomore years at the time. They didn't get
exposed to teaching at all at that time. And he
moved in that direction.
He was suspicious of bureaucracy at the same time.
I'll never forget, we had One of the buzzwords at
the time was performance-based teacher
education, performance-based teacher
counselor training, and all this. And one of our
Monday morning meetings that I had with him alone,
he said, and that is, he said, all this
performance-based stuff, he said, it's not going
to amount to anything. I thought in my head, most of
the time I thought in my head, he said, 10 years from
now, it's going to be the same. They'll forget this
whole business. And I'll never forget the endless
hours we worked on that. And the counseling
program, of which I was a part by then, my faculty
responsibility was as part of the counselor
training program in the Department of
Educational Psychology. We worked countless
hours devising a performance-based counselor
training program.
And we forgot it in two or three years. But one of the
reasons, one of the things he did which sort of
moved me out of the position was we had a consortium
of local school superintendents and college
faculty and a third entity, oh, the educational
service centers, a consortium to work on teacher
training. And since I hadn't come out of teacher
trained. I had been a psychologist all the way
through. He thought that
you could do better by moving Limbacher into that
position. And me go back to the old blackberry
college to teach him full time. And he gave me five
thousand dollars. He only had a project he wanted
to do. Move Limbacher in and said you take this and I
want you to do a field survey recent graduates of
teacher training here and see what they think the
weakest point in their training was. I spent the
spring semester, before I really got down to
teaching again, I spent the spring semester, this
was my event in 73, two or three years later, going
around the countryside talking to school
superintendents and principals about people
they'd hired in the 12th century, talking to the
people who said, Give him a short report after
that, it was true. Do you remember the high points
of that report? The high point was that there was
not enough about teaching, enough about
classroom management. And what was the strength?
That was a weakness, what was the strength? Well,
the strength was they came A&M. They were, A&M
graduates were premium hires, especially in
health and physical education. People would,
superintendents from all over the countryside
would flock to get those people because I- Why?
Because they had a rigid academic program, even
those days. There were not a bunch of football
players. Who deserved the credit for that? Well,
you're going to have to give Carl Linus part of it,
at least. And that started before Frank Hubert and
I ever came. Carl Linus was doing a good job of
preparing PE teachers a long time ago. Any other
names in that department appropriate to mention?
In health and PE? Well, of course, very soon,
believe it or not, he was upgrading. And he brought
in, that's when he brought in George Jessup from
California. Jessup. J-E-S-S-U-P. George
Jessup. His specialty of course was human
performance. Not the kind of performance based on
the stuff we were talking about before, but I mean
physical human performance. And he started a lab
over there which is going today. George is not a
part of it. He started that thing. And I was one of
his guinea pigs. The first one he called over and
gave that battery test where he spent two hours
running me through the mills like the astronauts.
I think they're still going today. Yeah. Other key
family members in? In health and P.E.
Mm-hmm. Oh, there are a good bunch of people. I
hesitate to single out any of them that I became
friends with. I became friends with a whole bunch
of people. Now, let's see. Grunemann in
industrial ed, that was over, Was that in
engineering? Engineering, but they didn't have
too much connection with engineering. They were
really an education department. Ag education was
a part of agriculture. In fact, when I drew up the
chart to take to the coordinating board, you had a
line going through the Dean of Agriculture and one
going through the Dean of Education. But all the
other departments were solely in the College of
Education. I see. So there was... What were the
other departments in? Curriculum instruction,
administration, educational psychology,
ag education, industrial education. Education
and physical health, H and PE. Yeah. Did campus
reputation, was one of those thought to be harder
than the others academically or softer than the
others academically? Yeah, there's no doubt that
health and physical education had the reputation
to be the toughest. The toughest? Yeah. All right,
did any of them have the reputation of being the
softest? I don't know of any, but I was just
wondering if.
If any, it would be curriculum and instruction.
There were, you looked to see where the football
players were. And some of them went to industrial
education. And some of them came to curriculum
instruction. But see, education and psychology
didn't have any undergraduates, so we didn't
suffer that way. But when I was associate dean, at
that time we had a policy that we just do darn near
anything in terms of transferring students. It's
become a nightmare now to transfer from
engineering to education or business or
whatever. But in those days, if a guy came in and
could convince me that he was misplaced in
engineering, back to my counseling days, I
remembered very well. So many people were caught
up in the romance of the space age and the romance of
engineering that they went over there whether
they ought to go over there or not. So I was pulling
people into education and doing everything I
could legally, which was quite a bit. to get them at
the College of Education and get them graduated.
And at that time I was allowed to take
F's off their degree plan. Still had them on the
transcript. I made out a degree plan for them and I
didn't put down the F's and the D's. I put down the
courses they made up. And then they had to continue
to make good courses in education, and they
graduated. And it's much harder to do that today.
It's not impossible, but it's much, much harder
today. The reason I know this, of course, is
because my daughter, Chris Boyd, is in the same
position this day and time, where I hear her tell
about how hard it is to transfer from college
education, to transfer from general studies,
which she supervises. But for the two and a half
years I was there, I had pretty much free hand. But
we didn't have any identity. Dean Hubert and I
decided we'd have a complication of all education
majors. We put out plenty of publicity and we got a
big meeting room, 330 seats over the temperature
building. and specified a night we thought that it
would be available to anybody but a handful. Which
gave us a signal that there was no real identity
with the college there. And I'm not sure we have any
identity anywhere else the same way on the campus.
You have some identity with departments. There
they have an in-group feeling. But he was looking
for the in-group feeling there. And I guess one of
the reasons he hired me was, hey, here's a
counselor. Maybe he can help us with this business
of creating an atmosphere. In the early 70s, when
the College of Education was created, Dean's
office was in... The old library. The library.
Then moved over to academic... Oh, uh... Let's see
what that sequence was. Don't I remember his
office, Hubert's office, being on the south end of
academic? Yeah, first floor. Yeah. That's where
the reason for that was
the Department of Education had been there. Okay.
See? And when he became dean, for a while he was also
department head of curriculum instruction as
well as dean. Where were the other academicians?
other departments of education. The old red brick
building that they called, oh it used to have
Textile Engineering in it. It sits over there now.
Where?
I forget. It's north of the library, somewhere in
there. It's now been torn down. Yeah, and then our
department scattered out. Part of them went to one
building and part to another until we finished the
education building. When the college is created,
did it have master's degrees? And doctor's
degrees. And doctoral degrees, both at that
point? Yes. The way he did that was check a little
block. You haven't heard that tale? No, no. share
that. When he applied, I didn't see this piece of
paper, but when he applied to the Coordinating
Board for what degrees will you offer at the
College of Education, it had little boxes there to
check, bachelor's, master's, doctor's. So we
checked them all. That's all the rest of it. Didn't
have to go through a study or anything. We started
out in 68 or whenever it was, we had that. And we had a
PhD right then. I was chairman of the, I guess the
second Ph.D. in Canada. I was chairman of the
committee,
Wesley Saunders. We had, the first one was an
education major, but as an Arab from Egypt, and he
went back to Egypt I guess, but Wesley was the first
one after him. Well, I say I was the chair. I was the
working chair at Haskell. Somebody else was the
chair. I forget who now, but because it was in test
and measurement, they let me run the thing. And
Wesley and I grounded out pretty quick there. But
yeah, that's where we got the PhD. And when we went,
that was as the Department of Education and
Psychology. Then we went to the College of
Education, all the five departments, six
departments, had the same degrees offered. See,
that's the upper level. So at Sac, they never did
have to go through a coordinating board, you know,
a stealth study in order to get their Ph.D. So it was
an Ed.D. and a Ph.D. either or both. Either or both.
Okay. In every department. In every department.
Yeah. Imagine what it would be like today to try to
get a number of southern associations and Texas
Education Agency staff studies out down 30 years.
Wow. Do you remember in those changes any examples
of higher administration and or board of
directors, it would have been called then,
involvement, positive or negative?
Nope, I don't. There may have been some. I don't
know. I think Dean Hubert's influence statewide
was really considerable. And I'm reading between
the lines here. I think he had a little bit of an end
with the Texas Education Agency as well as the
Board of Education. I think you're right. First of
all, he'd worked for Dr. Edgar. Yeah. and I have
always assumed that that was the connection that
may have led Earl Rudder to know who Frank Hubert
was in the summer of 1959. Well, I think
you have to check this out, but I thought that the
Rudders and the Huberts lived neighborhood close
in Austin. Oh, didn't know that. Across the alley
or whatever. Didn't know that. You have to check
that out to be sure. Because they were there at the
same time. At the same time, yeah. He stayed over
there. Rudder came to the Texas Edge, came to the
Rudder Land Board in 52, I believe, when we had a big
scandal over there. I was in graduate school in
Texas, so I knew all about it. In fact, the guy who
was Baskin-Giles. Baskin-Giles. His sister was
in my classes at the University of Texas. Sort of a
situation there. But then he, Rudder, came over
and stayed about six or eight years. And came over
here as Vice President. And he brought some people
with him. He brought, I think he brought Frank
Hewlett. I think he brought the guy who became the
Comptroller.
He lived across the street from me down . And his
wife is still in First Presbyterian Church down
there with him. Oh, oh, oh. Do you know who that is?
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Oh, cool. Well, I think Rudder
brought him. OK. Fill me in chronologically as you
recall it. Mr. Rudder dies. And for most of us, it
seemed comparatively sudden. Yeah. Do you
remember any feelings of the
interim period? I can remember uncertainty. And
they didn't trust the guy who was the guy who was
interim. The general was at Freeman. I think it was
Clyde Freeman. Clyde Freeman. I think so. People
felt he didn't know anything about the academic
division. They were afraid of him. those months
there went by while he acted. I know the guy and I
didn't have much feeling one way or the other, but I
felt the campus was a little uncertain of itself.
Do you remember any reaction to hearing that they
had selected a new president?
That fall? No, except relief. You know the story
about Tiger Teague being on the campus and when
Williams came, don't you? No, share that. Down
there, and of course we're in the time of students
marching on the president's homes, and so the
students marched on the president's home. And
Tiger Thief went to the door and said, oh my God,
they've got to march on the president's home.
They're down here to protest. Williams walked on
out. They'd come to welcome me, not to criticize
me. That was one of the unusual things. The whole
cadet corps was out there, I think, and others were
out there in the front yard to greet the new
president. What was your impression of Jack
Williams? Man, we could never have, we could look
for years and never got a better one. He
complemented completely and totally Rudder's
regime. Complemented it. And he told a joke the
first time he spoke in front of the faculty. He told
a joke, I'm sure you were there, about the old Aggie
who talked to him and said, Mr. Williams, you're
the first non-Aggie. We're going to be watching
you damn
close. And what was your impression of his
various abilities? Man, there's just no
question. I thought he was ideal in every way. It's
too bad he couldn't have lived longer and made an
oral remark. Of course that summer, Frank Hubert
had sent me off, I was just in, and he'd sent me off to
this seminar for new administrators. Remember
that thing? Did you ever go to that thing? You want
to hear? Yeah. I've spoken to it 21 years ago. Yeah,
okay, but Did you go through it as a participant? We
had a week here and a week up on the TCU campus. And
Williams, of course, addressed us there. And I
never forget the joke he told about the steam
whistle. You heard that one? You ought to get that
one down if you haven't heard it. First morning he
came to work and the whistle blew at the power
plant. And at 12 o'clock it blew again. He asked the
secretary, what was that? He said, that's 8, 12, 1,
and 5. That's the whistle it was. And he said, I
picked up the phone and called the plant. Told
them, never blow that thing again. This is an
academic institution. And to this group of
budding administrators, he says, and that It's
more initiative than I would have taken at any
other time in my administrative career. Not
daring to do that. My first day on the job, stop the
whistle.
Who were his key associates? That's harder for me
to get at. Nah.
I believe you're going to have to get a lot of that
from somewhere else, because I don't remember. By
this time, I was out of the administrative cycle
and into being a new faculty member full time in a
department which had a few troubles. All right,
let's look at these two presidents now. I'm going
to ask the negative. What were the key decisions
that you can think of during their times. Well one
minor one that so fits the other thing about
Williams was we were having all the bomb threats
around the campus and Williams called the
associate deans together and said You're the
administrators and so forth. We said, I'm here to
tell you that we're going to run this campus. We're
going to take all precautions. We're not going to
close down any building any time for a bomb threat.
That's an early decision, and I thought it was the
kind of decision which needed to be made, and he
made it. How many more bomb threats did we have? I
don't think so. Whether we got out or not. That's
the one I remember now. There must have been some
others. He also had
the...
He is the one who...
Let's
see. What about his... described Williams as a
speaker before. Complete control. Every word as
if he'd planned it weeks in advance and spoken just
exactly with the right inflection of his voice.
That was my impression of it. Yeah.
And let's see. In education, y'all didn't make any
major changes under Williams because y'all were
already there in terms of the degrees and the
organization and so forth. We did get national
recognition for our programs from the
professional societies. Educational
psychology did at the time. We had counseling in
psychology and school psychology. besides being
accredited, you also get approval by the National
Associations, and we got that through long before
the Department of Psychology did, by the way. Long
before. Do you remember any
comments relating to those reviews? Any
judgments? We didn't get ever, there was never a
question. as we went forward. We presented enough
data. We got so much support from the Institute of
Statistics, from the Department of Psychology,
from the Department of Sociology. There was never
a question that we would get it the first time we
went forward with the proposal. And it was
renewed. I was coordinator of the counseling
program at the time. And no question about it. At
that time, with whom did the A&M College of
Education most often compare itself in the
region? Who was the competing program, the
parallel program? Well, always a little bit of
comparison between the equal sized University of
Texas and us there. But the other teacher prep
institutions Commerce had a real good
reputation.
Huntsville had a good reputation.